ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES

UNIT 1
Question: What is Environment and explain its components and the interaction between the components. Briefly explain ecosystem. How are human activities adversely affecting the environment?
Answer: 
The word environment is derived from French world “Environ” means encircle or surround. The environment can be defined as the conditions or circumstances that surround an organism or groups of organism, or the complex of social or cultural conditions that affect an individual or community.
The 4 components of the environments are:
    1 AtmosphereAir)
    2 Hydrosphere(Water)
    3 Lithosphere(Rocks and Soil)
    4 Biosphere (Living component of the environment)

The 4 components are closely interconnected and a change in any one of them directly or indirectly results in change in the others. The classification of nature into different spheres helps to understand the distribution and flow of chemicals in the environment. 
ATMOSPHERE:
The cover of air that surrounds the earth surface is known as the Atmosphere. Atmosphere is the protective thick gaseous layer, surrounding the earth, which sustains the biological life and protects it from outer space. The Atmosphere extends up to 1600 kilometers above the Earth’s surface. It has 5 different layers which are classified based on the temperature. The layers are Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere, Ionosphere and Exosphere. 
HYDROSPHERE:
Water is essential for the survival of living organisms. Around 75% of the Earth’s surface is covered by water in the form of oceans, seas, rivers, lakes, ponds, etc. Most of this water not usable for human requirements as they are salt water.  Fresh water is available in the form of streams, snow , dew, rain, etc.  
LITHOSPHERE:
Lithosphere consists of the mantle of rocks that make up the Earth’s core, and Soil. It extends up to 50 km. Soil is extremely important for the growth of vegetation, thereby directly impacting our survival.
EXOSPHERE:
It is the domain of living organisms and their interaction with nevironment i.e. atmosphere, lithosphere and hydrosphere. Biosphere or ecosphere is known as biochemical system capable of capturing, converting, storing and utilizing the sun’s energy.

Ecosystem: 
An ecosystem can be defined as the self-sustained community of plants and animals existing in its own environment. The ecosystem can be of any size. For instance, a whole forest can be considered as an ecosystem whereas even a tiny droplet of water can be considered as an ecosystem. 
They can be classified into 2 major components: natural ecosystem and artificial ecosystem. Basically natural ecosystems are self regulatory and do not require human intervention whereas artificial ecosystems cannot sustain without human intervention.

There are various ways in which human activities affect the environment:
    a DEFORESTATION: It refers to the loss of forest cover, land that is permanently converted from forest to agricultural land, golf courses, cattle pastures, homes, lakes or desert. Deforestation leads to:
    i Loss of Biodiversity
    ii Soil erosion and consequently, landslides
    iii Loss of habitats for birds, animals, tribes and indigenous people.
    iv Lesser recycling of water, which leads to lesser rainfalls.
    v Release of carbon, leading to Greenhouse Effect. This leads to Global warming causing rising sea levels.

    b Water pollution: Unregulated discharge of toxic waste by industries, oil spillages in oceans, discarding of plastic and other non biodegradable waste materials are the biggest cause of water pollution. This leads to the contamination of water we consume and utilize, and at the same time lead to the death of aquatic animals.

    c Air pollution: Air pollution is mainly caused due to the release smoke, dust and other harmful substances into the atmosphere. Smoke and pollutants from industries, automobiles, houses, etc caused by burning of coal and fossil fuels is the major cause of air pollution. Emissions from vehicles, burning of crackers, burning of garbage also significantly contribute to its increase. This affects the air we breathe and thereby leads to many complications amongst human beings and other living things alike.

    d Soil pollution: Soil contamination or soil pollution as part of land degradation is caused by the presence of human-made chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. It is typically caused by industrial activity, agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste. This reduces the fertility of the soil, making it harder to grow crops and also causes the crops and vegetables to be toxic for human consumption.



UNIT 2
Question:  What are natural resources and how they have been classified and explain each type natural resources
Answer: 
Natural resources are resources that exist without any actions of human beings.
The 5 major natural resources are:
    1 Forest resources
    2 Water resources
    3 Food resources
    4 Land resources
    5 Mineral resources

1) Forest resources
A forest is a natural, self-sustaining community characterized by vertical struc­ture created by presence of trees. Trees are large, generally single-stemmed, woody plants. Forest can exist in many different regions under a wide range of conditions, but all true forests share these physical characteristics. Timber and other products of forests are important economically both locally and as exports. They have many aesthetic, recreational, economic, historical, cultural and religious values. 
Deforestation refers to the loss of forest cover, land that is permanently converted from forest to agricultural land, golf courses, cattle pastures, homes, lakes or desert. Depletion of forest tree crown cover less than 90 percent is considered forest degradation. 
Deforestation leads to:
    i       Loss of Biodiversity
    ii Soil erosion and consequently, landslides
    iii Loss of habitats for birds, animals, tribes and indigenous people.
    iv Lesser recycling of water, which leads to lesser rainfalls.
    v Release of carbon, leading to Greenhouse Effect. This leads to Global warming causing rising sea levels.

2) Water resources
Water resources are any of the entire range of natural waters that occur on the Earth, regardless of their state and are of potential use to humans. Of these, the resources most available for use are the waters of the oceans, rivers, and lakes; other available water resources include groundwater and deep subsurface waters and glaciers and permanent snowfields. Water is most important natural resources in all-economic activities ranging from agriculture to industry. We depend on water for irrigation, domestic needs, shipping and disposal of waste. It is essential for all physiological activities of plants, animals and microorganisms.
Water is essential for our survival and the fresh water resources are under great stress due to overuse and pollution caused by human beings. The major factors that affect the water crisis are inefficient irrigation, pollution of surface and ground water sources and the growing world population.
Water pollution: Unregulated discharge of toxic waste by industries, oil spillages in oceans, discarding of plastic and other non biodegradable waste materials are the biggest cause of water pollution. This leads to the contamination of water we consume and utilize, and at the same time lead to the death of aquatic animals.


3) Food resources
Every living organism depends on food for survival. Humans need food for their metabolic functioning and tissue development. The 2 major classifications of food resources are Plant food and Animal food.
Global food problem: In several countries, where populations are increasing rapidly, the production of food is not keeping pace with the increasing population. These countries, thus, find themselves unable to meet the food demand of their people. These countries are neither able to produce more food, nor able to import food grains due to their dwindling financial resources. 
Food security is the ability of all people at all times to access enough food for an active and healthy life. The following three conditions must be fulfilled to ensure food security:
    • Food must be available
    • Each person must have access to it
    • The food utilized must fulfill nutritional requirements.

4) Land resources
Land is an essential natural resource, both for the survival and prosperity of humanity, and for the maintenance of all terrestrial ecosystems. It is extremely important for agricultural practices and most of the food we consume is borne from land (soil). In view of this reason, the quality of soil and maintaining it in good condition becomes extremely important since the fertility of the soil will decide the quantum of production of crops and other vegetations. 
Land degradation is a natural or human-induced process that negatively affects the land to function effectively within an environmental system and can be defined as a process of degrading land from a former state. Land degradation results in the land being unusable for agriculture. It also leads to soil erosion.
Soil pollution: Soil contamination or soil pollution as part of land degradation is caused by the presence of human-made chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. It is typically caused by industrial activity, agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste. This reduces the fertility of the soil, making it harder to grow crops and also causes the crops and vegetables to be toxic for human consumption.

5) Mineral resources
Substances which are found in the rocks or are lying hidden under the ground are called minerals. These substances are mined out or pumped out of the earth. Some of the minerals like iron, copper, zinc,   aluminium, gold and silver are metals while some others like coal, petroleum, lime stone and salt are non-metals.
Mining is the extraction of valuable minerals or other geological materials from the earth .Ores recovered by mining include metals, coal, oil shale, gemstones, limestone etc. There are many adverse effects related to mining. Some of them are:
1. It leads to the emission of dust, suspended particle and gases which cause air pollution.
2. Release of harmful trace element e.g., CO, Pb, Cd etc. leads to the contamination of surface water.
3. Underground water is also contaminated due to seepage and infiltration of leached drainage.
4. Mining leads to the degradation of soil quality, fertility and makes it toxic.
5. Natural vegetation get adversely effected due to leached trace element.
6. The major consequences of mining is the deforestation which results in loss of flora and fauna.

UNIT-3:
Question:What is environmental pollution ?What are the causes for it?What are the effects of environmental pollution?
ANSWER
Environmental pollution is defined as the contamination of the physical and biological components of the earth/atmosphere system to such an extent that normal environmental processes are adversely affected.Pollution is caused by pollutants
A pollutant is a substance or energy introduced into the environment that has undesired effects, or adversely affects the usefulness of a resource. A pollutant may cause long- or short-term damage by changing the growth rate of plant or animal species, or by interfering with human amenities, comfort, health, or property values
Types of pollutants:

Classification of pollutants:
1.Based on the form they exists:
i.Primary Pollutants:They exists in form in which they are added to environment ex.DDT
ii.Secondary pollutants:They are formed by the interaction of primary pollutants
2.Based on biological degradability
i.Biodegradable pollutants:They are waste products which are degradable by micribial action ex.sewage
ii.Non biodegradable pollutants:They are not decomposed by microbial action ex plastic
3.Based on their existance:
i.Quantitative pollutants:The substances that become pollutants when they reach certain concentration level 
ii.Qualitative pollutnats:These substances that do not occur in nature but are passed through environment activity.
4.Base on origin:
i.Natural pollutants:Caused by natural events like volcanic eruption
ii.Man made pollutants:Caused by manual activities such as by industry etc...
Types of pollution:
Air pollution:
Air pollution is a mixture of solid particles and gases in the air.
Causes for air pollution:
i.Gas emmitted from industies and vehicles are one of main reasons for air pollution
ii.Practicing inorganic framing is also a reson for air pollution
iii.Apart from that natural causes such as volacanic eruption and forest fires are major contributors for air pollution
Effect of air pollution:
i.Accelerated Global Warming:Increased amount of carbon dioxide leads to global warming
ii.Acid Rain:Increase amount  SO2 in atmosphere causes acid rain
iii.Human respiratory diseases and heart concerns: It is found that air pollution leads to diseases like asthama and increased heart failuers due to presence of allergic pollents and dust

Solution:
i.Use of electric transport vehicles and public transport vehicles
ii.Reducting the  use of fossil fuels
iii.Recycling of e waste and plastic which on burning releases toxic gases into atmosphere
2.Water Pollution:
Water pollution occurs when harmful substances—often chemicals or microorganisms—contaminate a stream, river, lake, ocean, aquifer, or other body of water, degrading water quality and rendering it toxic to humans or the environment.
Causes:
			    • chemical pollution from industries, mines, etc.;
    • inadequate sewage collection and treatment;
    • increase in fertilizers to grow more food.
    • litter, which causes disease and has a negative visual impact.
Effect:
Destruction of biodiversity. Water pollution depletes aquatic ecosystems and triggers unbridled proliferation of phytoplankton in lakes eutrophication. 
    • Contamination of the food chain. Fishing in polluted waters and the use of waste water for livestock farming and agriculture can introduce toxins into foods which are harmful to our health when eaten. 
    • Lack of potable water. The UN says that billions of people around the world have no access to clean water to drink or sanitation, particularly in rural areas. 
    • Disease. The WHO estimates that about 2 billion people have no option but to drink water contaminated by excrement, exposing them to diseases such as cholera, hepatitis A and dysentery. 
    • Infant mortality. According to the UN, diarrhoeal diseases linked to lack of hygiene cause the death of about 1,000 children a day worldwide. 
Soil pollution:Soil pollution as part of land degradation is caused by the presence of xenobiotics (human-made) chemicals or other alteration in the natural soil environment. It is typically caused by industrial activity, agricultural chemicals or improper disposal of waste.
Causes:
    • Industrial waste. 
    • Deforestation. 
    • Excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides.
    • Garbage pollution
    • Climate change. 
    • Loss of soil fertility.
    • Impact on human health. 
    • Reforestation.
Effects:
i.Inferior Crop Quality
It can decrease the quality of the crop. Regular use of chemical fertilizers, inorganic fertilizers, pesticides will decrease the fertility of the soil at a rapid rate and alter the structure of the soil.
ii.Harmful Effect on Human Health
It will increase the exposure to toxic and harmful chemicals thus increasing health threats to people living nearby and on the degraded land.
iii.Water Sources Contamination
The surface run-off after raining will carry the polluted soil and enter into different water resource. 
iv.Negative Impact on Ecosystem and Biodiversity
Soil pollution can cause an imbalance of the ecosystem of the soil. 
Noise pollution:Noise pollution is generally defined as regular exposure to elevated sound levels that may lead to adverse effects in humans or other living organisms. According to the World Health Organization, sound levels less than 70 dB are not damaging to living organisms, regardless of how long or consistent the exposure is.

Causes:
Following are the causes and sources of noise pollution:
    • Industrialization: Industrialization has led to an increase in noise pollution as the use of heavy machinery such as generators, mills, huge exhaust fans are used, resulting in the production of unwanted noise. 
    • Vehicles: Increased number of vehicles on the roads are the second reason for noise pollution. 
    • Events: Weddings, public gatherings involve loudspeakers to play music resulting in the production of unwanted noise in the neighbourhood. 
    • Construction sites: Mining, construction of buildings, etc add to the noise pollution. 
Effects:
Noise pollution can be hazardous to human health in the following ways:
    • Hypertension: It is a direct result of noise pollution which is caused due to elevated blood levels for a longer duration. 
    • Hearing loss: Constant exposure of human ears to loud noise that are beyond the range of sound that human ears can withstand damages the eardrums resulting in loss of hearing. 
    • Sleeping disorders: Lack of sleep might result in fatigue and low energy level throughout day affecting everyday activities. Noise pollution hampers the sleep cycles leading to irritation and uncomfortable state of mind. 
    • Cardiovascular issues: Heart-related problems such as blood pressure level, stress, and cardiovascular diseases might come up in a normal person and person suffering from any of these diseases might feel the sudden shoot up in the level. 
Prevention of environmental pollution:
In energy sector
    • increasing efficiency in energy use; 
    • use of environmentally benign fuel sources. 
In the agricultural sector, pollution prevention approaches include:
    • Reducing the use of water and chemical inputs; 
    • Adoption of less environmentally harmful pesticides or cultivation of crop strains with natural resistance to pests; and 
    • Protection of sensitive areas. 
In the industrial sector, examples of P2 practices include:
    • Modifying a production process to produce less waste 
    • Using non-toxic or less toxic chemicals as cleaners, degreasers and other maintenance chemicals 
    • Implementing water and energy conservation practices 
    • Reusing materials such as drums and pallets rather than disposing of them as waste 
In homes and schools examples of P2 practices include:
    • Using reusable water bottles instead of throw-aways 
    • Automatically turning off lights when not in use 
    • Repairing leaky faucets and hoses

UNIT 4:
Question:What are the social and environmental issues concerning nature and what are the steps taken to solve that?
Answer
1.Population growth:
Population growth has been a major factor for many environmental issues and other human  resource factor
Population refers to the total number of people living in a region at a particular time. The society has experienced exponential population growth over time. There are currently a total of 7.7 billion people on this planet, and India homes 1.3 billion people and is the second-largest populous country after China. In India, Mumbai is the top populated city with 12 billion people and Delhi, the next with 11 billion people.
Population growth has become a pressing issue in the world, as well as our country today. This is because a growing population requires a growing economy and has increasing needs. Therefore, the large population becomes a problem when the state lacks enough space, enough food, and necessary supplies to live off.
Thus, population growth needs to be administered carefully for the betterment of people.

Causes of population growth:
There are huge problems that are the root cause of India’s population growth. Factors such as mortality and fertility rates, child marriage, boy’s importance, ignorance about family planning, rational decisions, polygamy marriage, and the age and sex factors of the present population influence population growth.
With time, humans have made notable and significant advancements in the field of technology, science, and medicine. With the invention of treatments, vaccines, and the eradication of various diseases, people today have a higher life expectancy than their forefathers.
Effects of population growth:
The exponential growth in population has caused severe effects on our planet. The most common and current impact of population growth is the limited quantity of natural resources, mainly fossil fuels. Due to the population explosion, resources are decreasing, becoming rarer, and will run out entirely.
The overgrowth in population has led to massive effects such as industrialization, pollution, and unemployment. These components have adversely affected our environment leading to various health problems in society.
Deforestation of spaces has destroyed the natural habitats of species and has disturbed ecological balance. And with the rapid increase in population, pooper nations suffer famines and various other natural disasters due to a shortage of food and other resources. Another adverse effect is global warming and climate change, which are the significant consequences of the increasing population.


To control population growth, people around the world need awareness on family planning values, the ill-effects of global overpopulation, and the sustainable growth values. Awareness programs and rewards might boost the knowledge of population growth.

2:Water conservation:
With increase in population we are witnessing the reduction of water sources.Studies have stimated that bt 2050 drinking water will be depleted hence it is very important to follow basic water conservation techniques
Water conservation is the practice of using water efficiently to reduce unnecessary water usage. According to Fresh Water Watch, water conservation is important because fresh clean water is a limited resource, as well as a costly one.So there two main methods 
1.rain water harvesting
2:ground water recharging
1:rain water harvesting
Rainwater Harvesting is one of the most commonly used methods to save water. It refers to storing of rainwater for various uses. The notion behind rainwater harvesting is to not waste the rainwater and prevent it from running off. In other words, it is done to collect rainwater using simple mechanisms. This method is very useful considering the water scarcity that is happening in India. Moreover, rainwater harvesting is so easy that almost anyone can do it. We must encourage this practice to help people get access to clean water easily without any cost.
Rain water harvesing methods:
Rainwater harvesting is a very simple method that can be practiced by anyone. There are primarily two types of rainwater harvesting methods. The first one is surface runoff harvesting. In this method, the water that runs off the surface is focused on. We see how the surface runoff causes a lot of loss of water. However, if we make proper arrangements, we can even save that water to use for various purposes.
In this method, we can collect the surface runoff water by making a path that directs to a storage space like a tank or pond. This can help store water in a large amount which can be used later for a lot of work. Everyone can design an efficient system which will collect large amounts of water from roads, gardens, parks and more. It will definitely be enough to sustain a community and even a city is designed on a larger level.
However, the runoff water will have a lot of impurities. Therefore, it is important to first filter the water properly so it can be reused for all purposes, whether it is drinking or cooking.
Since it is somewhat easy to implement it has become mandatory in urban areas to have rain water harvesing system for each house


2:Ground water recharging:
Water residing inside the lower layer of earths crust is called as hround water.It is also main source of drinking water.
Groundwater levels are declining across the country as our withdrawals exceed the rate of aquifers to naturally replenish themselves, called recharge. One method of controlling declining water levels is by using artificial groundwater recharge. The USGS monitors wells to evaluate the effect of groundwater depletion and recharge, and provides vital information to those who depend on groundwater resources.


There are mainly two methods:
1 Natural method:Natural groundwater recharge occurs as precipitation falls on the land surface, infiltrates into soils, and moves through pore spaces down to the water table. Natural recharge also can occur as surface-water leakage from rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands.
2:Artificial method:
Artificial recharge can be done through injection of water through wells. This method often is applied to recharge deep aquifers where application of water to the land surface are not effective at recharging these aquifers.
Cons of ground water recharging:
1:Sometimes it is difficult to implement this mechanism as geographical area is not supportive
2:In such areas implementation is costly






3.Disaster Management:
Disaster Management can be defined as the organization and management of resources and responsibilities for dealing with all humanitarian aspects of emergencies, in particular preparedness, response and recovery in order to lessen the impact of disasters.


Floods:
The natural disasters are something which are out of control of humans hence we can only reduce the damage by cannot stop it.floods are one of the natural disaster.Flood disaster management implies not letting the excess runoff water flow suddenly and intensively in the drainage network.
Steps in flood management:
1:Flood forecasting:It is important step and it helps to prepare for worst case and moving the people from critical zones to safe zones(higher ground)
2:Establishing control rooms:As the cellular network will be down during any natural disaster communicating for rescue teams becomes difficult hence control rooms helps to guide the rescue teams to needy people
3:setting up camps:it helps by providing food shelter to migrated people

Earthquake:
As every other natural disaster earthquake is one which cannot be predicted
steps for earthquake management
1.Moving and rescuing people from epicenter and affected areas:This is important to avoid further loss of life due to aftershocks
2:Closely monitoring tidal activity:If the epicenter was near costal area the there might be chance of flood or tsunami in that case moving people to higher ground(other than buildings) becomes important
3:Sending rescue teams and establishing a search operation for missing people:
Some people might be strucked inside crashed buildings hence it is important to establishing communication channels and  sending help to those people




4:Environment protection acts:
in order to protect the environment govt has passe some bills and taken many steps some are listed below
The Environment Protection act 1984:
In the wake of the Bhopal Gas Tragedy or Bhopal Disaster, the [Government of India] enacted the Environment Protection Act of 1986 under Article 253 of the Constitution. Passed in March 1986, it came into force on 19 November 1986. It has 26 sections and 4 chapters. The purpose of the Act is to implement the decisions of theUnited Nations Conference on Human Environment They relate to the protection and improvement of the human environment and the prevention of hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants and property. The Act is an “umbrella” legislation designed to provide a framework for central government coordination of the activities of various central and state authorities established under previous laws, such as the Water Act and the Air Act.
This act was enacted by the Parliment of India in 1986. As the introduction says, "An Act to provide for the protection and improvement of environment and for matters connected therewith: Where as the decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate steps for the protection and improvement of human environment. Where as it is considered necessary further to implement the decisions aforesaid in so far as they relate to the protection and improvement of environment and the prevention of hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants and property".This was due to Bhopal Gas Tragedy which was considered as the worst industrial tragedy in India.
This act included many guidelines and measures to ensure such act dont repeat in future

The wildlife protection acts(1972):
This act provided protection to wild life and put ban on hunting killing and capturing
wild animals and imposed strict punishment for those who violate same.
It recognized wild life species as a part of ecosystem
The Forest Act of 1980 
IT prohibited the converting forest land for agricultural or any purpose (non agricultural)
It also stated that in order to preserve wild life ,any activities that can harm forest area are illigal

These were some of the steps taken by govt to preserve the environment.
